# the project layout
image from p.68

The wwwroot folder is special, it is the only folder in your app that browser are allowed to directly access when browsing your web app.

The most important file in default project is SimpleApp.csproj, as it describes how to build your project (msbuild).

## the .csproj file: defining your dependencies
It is the project file for any .NET app. 
It contains the details required for the .NET tooling to build your project. 
It defines the type of project being built (webapp, console, library), which platform the project targets (.NET Core 3.1, .NET 5.0, so on) and which NuGet packages the project depends on.

In ASP.NET Core the .csproj file has been modified (improved) to make it easier to read and edit. These changes include:
* no GUIDs - Previously, GUIDs were used for many things, but now they are rarely used in project file.
* Implicit files include - Previously, every file in the project has to be listed in the .csproj file for it to be included in the build. Now, files are automatically compiled.
* No paths to NuGet package .dll files - Previosly, you had to include the path to the .dll files contained in NuGet packages in the .csproj, as well as listing the dependencies in a package.config file. Now you can reference the NuGet package directly in your .csproj, and you do not need to specify the path on disk.


### .net project SDK
.NET Core and .NET 5 and later projects are associated with a software development kit (SDK). Each project SDK is a set of MSBuild targets and associated tasks that are responsible for compiling, packing, and publishing code. A project that references a project SDK is sometimes referred to as an SDK-style project.
https://docs.microsoft.com/en-us/dotnet/core/project-sdk/overview#:~:text=See%20also-,.,%2C%20packing%2C%20and%20publishing%20code.  
So, basically, SDK contains msbuild and is used to build a project in .net core (SDK is cross platform).

## the program class; building a web host
The *IHost* is the core of your app, containing the app configuration and the Kestrel server that listens to requests and sends responses.  

```sh
public class Program
{
    public static void Main(string[] args)
    {
        // Creates an IHostBuilder;
        CreateHostBuilder(args)
            .Build()
            .Run(); -- Runs the IHost and starts listeting to requests and generating                responses.
    }
    
    public static IHostBuilder CreateHostBuilder(string[] args) =>
        Host.CreateDefaultBuilder(args)
            .ConfigureWebHostDefaults(webBuilder => -- Configures app to use Kestrel
            {
                webBuilder.UseStartup<Startup>();
            });
}
```
Note: You'll find this pattern of using a builder object to configurate a complex object repeated throughout the ASP.NET Core framework. It is a useful technique for allowing users to configure an object, delaying its creation until all configuration has finished.

### Program vs Startup
At this point you may be wondering why you need two classes for configuration: Program and Startup. Why not include all your app config into one class?  
Generally speaking, Program is where you configure the infrastructure of your app, such as HTTP server (Kestrel), integration with IIS, and config sources.  
In contrast, Startup is where you define which components and features your app uses, and the middleware pipeline for your app.  

picture. page 73

### Creating services with the generic host
It might seem strange that you must call ConfigureWebHostDefaults as well as CreateDefaultBuilder—couldn’t we just have one method? Isn’t handling HTTP requests the whole point of ASP.NET Core?  
Well, yes and no! ASP.NET Core 3.0 introduced the concept of a generic host. This allows you to use much of the same framework as ASP.NET Core applications to write non-HTTP applications. These apps can be run as console apps or can be installed as Windows services (or as systemd daemons on Linux), to run background tasks or read from message queues, for example.  
Kestrel and the web framework of ASP.NET Core builds on top of the generic host functionality introduced in ASP.NET Core 3.0. To configure a typical ASP.NET Core app, you configure the generic host features that are common across all apps; features such as configuration, logging, and dependency services. For web applications, you then also configure the services, such as Kestrel, that are necessary to handle web requests.

### Startup
* Service registration - DI registration of your classes which you will use in runtime
* Middleware and endpoints - how your app handles and responds to requests

IHostBuilder calls ConfigureServices and then Configure.

picture page 75

An interesting point about Startup class is that it does not implement an interface as such. Instead, the methods are invoked by using reflection to find methods with the predefined names of Configure and ConfigureServices. This makes the class more flexible and **enables you to modify the signature of the method to accept additional parameters that are fulfilled automatically**.