# middleware
In .net core middleware are C# classes or functions that handle HTTP request or response.  
The most important piece of middleware in most apps is the **EndpointMiddleware** class. This class normally generates all your HTML pages and API responses. It typically receives the request, generates the response, and send it back to the user.  

Def: The arrangment, where a piece of middleware can call another piece of middleware, which in turn can call another, and so on, is referred to as a _pipeline_. U can think of each piece of middleware as a section of pipe.  

One of the most common use cases for middleware is for the cross-cutting concerns of your app. Something that should occurs every request. For example:
* logging each request
* adding standart security headers to response
* associate request with the relevant user
* setting the language for the request

## How it used to be:  
Middleware vs HTTP modules + HTTP handlers.  
In the previous version of ASP.NET, the concept of middleware pipeline is not used.  
Instead, you have HTTP modules and HTTP handlers.  

An _HTTP handler_ is a process that runs in response to a request and generates the response. For example, the ASP.NET page handler runs in response to requests for .aspx pages. Alternatively, u could write custom handler that returns resized images when an image is requested.  

HTTP modules handle the cross-cutting concerns of app, like security, logging or session management.  They run in response to the lifecycle events that a request progresses through when it’s received by the server. Examples of events include _BeginRequest, AcquireRequestState, and PostAcquireRequestState_.

This approach works, but it’s sometimes tricky to reason about which modules will
run at which points. Implementing a module requires a relatively detailed understanding of the state of the request at each individual lifecycle event.The middleware pipeline makes understanding your application far simpler. The pipeline is completely defined in code, specifying which components should run and in which order. Behind the scenes, the middleware pipeline in ASP.NET Core is simply a chain of method calls, where each middleware function calls the next in the pipeline.  

## how to use
You can find some of middlewares (sad but there is no list of all middlewares available out there) here: https://github.com/aspnet/aspnetcore under src/Middleware folder.  
Also some other middlewares can be found under other folders of framework (e.g src/Security - for auth middleware).  

## exception handling middleware
The ability to dynamically generate a response is a key feature of ExceptionHandlerMiddleware - it allows you to re-execute a middleware pipeline in order to generate the response sent to the user.  
That is great because it allows to show some data which are retrieved or created dynamically, like user name etc (not something static).  

image page 115

Note: You will not have infinite loop in case some exception been throwing during error handling. The algo how it will work is following:
* User send request, the code generating the menu bar (dynamic stuff which is also used in error page) throws an exception.
* Exception middleware handles the exception.
* ExceptionHandlerMiddleware captures it and the pipe is reexecuted using the error handling path.
* Again menu bar throws exception.
* ExceptionHandlerMiddleware know that it already tryed to intercept a request, so it will let the error to propagate all the way back to user.
* 500 on user page.

Thanks to this issues, it is good convention to make your error handling pages as simple as possible, to reduce the possibility of error occuring.  

## handling error status codes in response
Exceptions are not the only sort of errors you will encounter. In some cases, your middlware pipeline will return an HTTP error status code in response. It's important to handle both exceptions and error status codes to provide a coherent user exceptions.

You can use StatusCodePagesMiddleware and it will show the user status code.  
But a more typical approach to using StatusCodePagesMiddleware in production is to **reexecute the pipeline when an error is captured**, using a similar technique to the ExceptionHandlerMiddleware. This allows us to have dynamic error pages that fit with the rest of our app. To use the technique just add:
```sh
app.UseStatusCodePagesWithReexecute("/{0}");
```
This extension method configures this middleware to re-execute the pipeline whenever a 4xx or 5xx response code is found, using the provided error handling path.  

Note that path "/{0}" contains a format string token, {0}.  
The middleware will replace this token with the error code. For example 404 would reexecute the /404 path.  

### error handling middleware and WebApi
In case of webapi, you probably won't be returning HTML to the client, but rather JSON.  
More about webapi approach a bit later on (look for webapi doc).