# basic webapi
investigate:
* routing
* validation, model binding

book: React in Action by M. Thomas


Some people think of the MVC pattern as only applying to apps that directly render their UI, like Razor views. But the MVC pattern applies equally well when building a Web API, however the view part here involves generating a _machine_-friendly response rather than a user-friendly response.  


```
dotnet new webapi -o [ProjectName]
```

## basic action results
```
// This method can not return NotFound as result
[HttpGet("fruit")]
public IEnumerable<string> GetFruits()
{
    return _fruits;
}

[HttpGet("fruit/{id}")]
public ActionResult<string> GetFruit(int id)
{
    if (id >= 0 && id < _fruits.Count)
    {
        return _fruits[id];
    }

    return NotFound();
}
```
The generic ActionResult<T> has two benefits:
* you can return either an instance of T or an ActionResult implementation, for instance NotFoundResult from the same method
* it enables better integration with asp.net core openapi support

application pipeline, image, page 301

Note: Where possible, keep your page handlers and controllers as simple as practicable. Move all your business logic decisions into the service that make up your app model, and keep your controllers focused on the mechanics of interacting with a user.  

We use the api model in connection with an _output formatter_.  
An output formatter serializes the API model into a machine-readable response, such as JSON or XML. The output formatter forms the 'V' in the Web API version of MVC, by choosing the appropriate representation of the data to return.

## attribute routing
Note: Do not use conventional routing, use attribute routing instead.
Note: It is good practice to use only one routing attribute per method, you can have multiple attributes with different URLs however that is not good practice.  

Note: Do not use route constrains for validation:
```
[Route("human/weight/{weight=80:int}")]
```
In this case, if user call "human/weight/{weight=80:int}" route with an invalid value for weight, /human/weight/lol , you will get 404 response (the endpoint is missing), while the correct behaviour should be 400 bad request response (validation).  

```
[Route("api/human")]
public class HumanController
{
    [Route("jump")] -- combines /api/human/jump
    [Route("/go")] -- does not combines /go
    public IActionResult Start()
    {
        // some logic here
    }
}
```
So to ignore the RouteAttribute on the controller and create an absolute route template, start your action method route template with the slash symbol "/".

Also you can apply attributes to a base class, and derived classes will inherit them.
```
[Route("api/[controller]")]
public abstract class BaseController {}

public class HumanController : BaseController {}
```

### api controller attribute
```
[ApiController]
public class HumanController : ControllerBase {}
```
The [ApiController] attribute automatically applies several conventions to your controllers:
* attribute routing - you must use attribute routing; you can't use conventional routing (we prefere to use it anyway)
* automatic 400 responses - without this attribute you will have to always check the value of ModelState.IsValid, but the attribute does it for you by adding a filter.
* model binding source interface - without attribute, complex types (.net objects, etc) are assumed to be passed as _form_ values in the request body. For webapi its much more common to pass data as JSON, which ordinarily requires adding the [FromBody] attribute. The [ApiController] takes care of that for you.
* ProblemDetails for error codes - you often want to return a consistent set of data when an error occurs in your API. ProblemDetails is a type based on a web standard that serves as this consistent data. The attribute will get status codes which you return and convert them into the ProblemDetails type automatically.


After all the **key** feature of [ApiController] attribute is using Problem Details format to return errors in a consistent formats accross all your controllers.  
A typical ProblemDetails obj looks something like this:
```
{
 type: "https://tools.ietfblablabal"
 titile: "One or more validation errors occured."
 status: 400
 traceId: "123vae134vbsrgsometraceid3"
 errors: {
     name: ["The name field is required."]
 }
}
```
The [ApiController] conventions can significantly reduce the amount of boilerplate code you have to write. They also ensure consistency across your whole application. For example, you can be sure that all your controllers will return the same error type, ValidationProblemDetails (a sub-type of ProblemDetails), when a bad request is received.

## converting all your errors (not only controller) to ProblemDetails
The [ApiController] attribute ensures that all error responses returned by your API controllers are converted into ProblemDetails objects, which keeps the error responses consistent across your application. 
The only problem with this is that your API controllers aren’t the only thing that could generate errors. For example, if a URL is received that doesn’t match any action in your controllers, the end-of-the-pipeline middleware we discussed in chapter 3 would generate a 404 Not Found response. As this error is generated outside of the API controllers, it won’t use ProblemDetails. Similarly, when your code throws an exception, you want this to be returned as a ProblemDetails object too, but this doesn’t happen by default.
But it can be complicated to handle all the edge cases. I prefer to use a community-created package, Hellang.Middleware.ProblemDetails, which takes care of this for you. 
Check out this blog post http://mng.bz/Gx7D. 

## generating a response from a model
```
[ApiController]
public class CarsController : Controller
{
    [HttpGet("api/cars")]
    public IEnumerable<string> ListCars()
    {
        return new string[]
        { "Mazda CX-5", "MBW X7"};
    }
}
}
```
In the abouve case we return data directly from an action method, in which case the middleware formats it and returns the formatted data to the caller.  
But how does the middleware knows which format to use? After all, you could serialize it as JSON, as XML, or even with a simple ToString() call.  
The process of determining the format of data to send to clients is known as **content negotiation**.  
At high level, the client sends a header indicating the types of content it can understands - the **Accept** header - and the server picks one of these, formats the response,and sends a **content-type** header in response, indicating which type it cose.
### the _Accept_ and _content-type_ headers
The Accept header is sent by a client as part of a request to indicate the type of content that the client can handle. It consists of a number of MIME types,a with optional weightings (from 0 to 1) to indicate which type would be preferred. For example, the
application/json,text/xml;q=0.9,text/plain;q=0.6 header indicates that the client can accept JSON, XML, and plain text, with weightings of 1.0, 0.9, and 0.6, respectively. JSON has a weighting of 1.0, as no explicit weighting was provided. The weightings can be used during content negotiation to choose an optimal representation for both parties.
The content-type header describes the data sent in a request or response. It contains the MIME type of the data, with an optional character encoding. For example, the application/json; charset=utf-8 header would indicate that the body of the request or response is JSON, encoded using UTF-8.
a For more on MIME types, see the Mozilla documentation: http://mng.bz/gop8.

ASP.NET Core, when you return an API Model from action method, will always return something. If it can't honor any of the types listed in Accept header, it will fall back to returning JSON by default.  

By default, only formatters for plain text (text/plain), HTML (text/html), and JSON (application/json) are configured.
