# DI
Here we will cover only basics.  
TODO in future: 
* using 3rd party DI container
* https://www.martinfowler.com/articles/injection.html
* book about DI
* implementing own DI contrainer


.NET Core has _dependency injection_ (sometimes called _dependency inversion_, _DI_, or _inversion of control_) backed into the heart of the framework.  

page 326. (dependency graph).
Each class has a number of dependencies, so the 'root' class, in this case UserController, needs to know how to create every class it depends on, as well as every class its dependencies depends on. This is called dependency graph.  


Note: **Without interfaces** when using DI you are not coupled that much, but you are still coupled to the implementation rather than interface! (still very hard to test)  


The approach where a class calls the DI container directly (by itself) to ask for a class is called the **service locator** pattern. Generally speaking, you should try to avoid this pattern.  

In order to register class in the DI:
```sh
public void ConfigureServices(IServiceCollection services)
{
    services.AddScoped<ISmtpSender, SmtpSender>();
}
```

However, this approach has some limitations and for that you need the further do as
## registering services using objects and lambdas
When you call Add* methods; method speficy the Type of the class to register, without giving any indication of _how_ to construct an instance of that type. Instead, the container (default .net core) makes a number of assumptions that you have to adhere to:
* the class must be a concrete type
* the class must only have a single *valid* constructor that container can use
* for a ctr to be valid, all it arguments must be registered with the container

In this case you can create the object by yourself and provide it to the DI container:
```sh
public void ConfigureServices(IServiceCollection services)
{
    service.AddSingleton(
    new EmailSererSettings
    (
        host: "smtp.server.com",
        port: 25,
    ));
}
```

or in case not a singleton:
```sh
public void ConfigureServices(IServiceCollection services)
{
    service.AddScoped(
    provider => new EmailSererSettings
    (
        host: "smtp.server.com",
        port: 25,
    ));
}
```

Note: It is preferable to group up custom services into logical collecitons if possible and create extension methods for them.
```sh
public static class EmailSenderServiceCollectionExtensions
{
    public static IServiceCollection AddEmailSender(
            this IServiceCollection services)
    {
        services.AddScoped<IEmailSender, EmailSender>();
        service.AddSingleton<NetworkService>();
        --//--
        service.AddSingleton(
            new EmailServerSettings
            (
                host: "smtp.server.com",
                port: 25,
            ));
        return services;
    }
}
```

## register a service in DI container multiple times
One of the advantages of coding to interface is that you can create multiple implementations of a service.  
Use case: you want a general interface for sending messages (email, sms, telegram)

```sh
public interface IMessageSender
{
    public void SendMessage(string message);
}
```
But how do you register these implementations (EmailSender, SmsSender, TelegramSender) in the container? And how can you inject these implementations into your UserController?  

register user case p.343 image  

So basically you can also inject few implementations by using IEnumerable and foreach:

```sh
public class UserController : ControllerBase
{
    private readonly IEnumerable<IMessageSender> _messageSenders;
    public UserController(IEnumerable<IMessageSender> messageSenders)
    {
        _messageSenders = messageSenders;
    }
    
    [HttpPost("register")]
    public IActionResult RegisterUser(string username)
    {
        foreach (var messageSender in _messageSenders)
        {
            messageSender.SendMessage(username);
        }
    }
}
}
```
and in startup class:
```sh
public void ConfigureServices(IserviceCollection services)
{
    services.AddScoped<IMessageSender, EmailSender>();
    services.AddScoped<IMessageSender, SmsSender>();
    services.AddScoped<IMessageSender, TelegramSender>();
}
```
### injecting a single implementation when multiple services are registered
Imagine u have already registered all your services (as it shown above); what happens if you have a service that requires only one of them?
```sh
public class SingleMessageSender
{
    private readonly IMessageSender _messageSender;
    public SingleMessageSender(IMessageSender messageSender)
    {
        _messageSender = messageSender;
    }
}
```
The DI container needs to pick a _single_ IMessageSender to inject into this sender service, out of the three implementations available.It does it by using the **last** registered implementation, in our case - TelegramSender.
Note: The DI container will use the last registered implementation of a service when resolving a single instance of the service.  

Its good to know that you can use TryAdd* so it will make sure that the service has not been registered before; and in case so register it.  

You can also inject service in action method (which are in controller) and not by constructor. You may want to do so in case you have action methods that are using not lighweight services and do not share them; but be aware that your controller should have high cohesion so maybe u will want to split your controller in few ones.  
To tell the binding that you want to get the service from DI and not the request use [FromService] attribute:
```sh
    public IActionResult RegisterUser(
        [FromService] IMessageSender messageSender,
        string username)
        {
            messageSender.SendMessage(username);
            return Ok();
        }
```

## Understanding lifetimes: When are services created?
Def: The **lifetime** of a service is how long an instance of a service should live in a container before it creates a new instance.  
With the build-in container you can use three different lifetimes:
* Transcient - every time a service is requested, a new instance is created. This means you can potentially have different instances of the same class within same dependency graph.
* Scoped - within a scope (request), all requests for a service will give you the same object. For different scopes you will get different objects. In .NET Core, each web request has its own scope.
* Singleton - you will always get the same instance of the service, no matter which scope.

Transcient lifetimes can result in a lot of objects being created, so they make he most case for lightweight services with little or no state. It's equivalent to calling **new** every time you need a new object. You probably won't use the transcinet lifetime too often; the majority of your services will probably be scoped instead.  

Database contexts and authentication services are common exampels of services that should be scoped to a request - anything that you wnat to share accross your services within a single request but that need to change between requests.  


Singleton services must be thread-safe in a web app, as the'll typically be used by multiple threads during concurrent requests.  
A caching service should be singleton, as all requests need to share it; but it bust also be thread safe.  

Warning: A service should only use dependencies with a lifetime longer or equal to the lifetime of the service. A service registered as a singleton can only safely use singleton dependencies. A service registered as scoped can safely use scoped or singleton dependencies. A transcient service can use dependencies with any lifetime.