# the basics of ef core
One of the biggest advantages of ORM is also their Achilles' heel - they hide the db from you.  
Sometimes this high level of abstraction can lead to problematic database query pattern in your app. A classic example is the **N+1** problem, where what should be a single database request turns into separate requests for every single row in a db table.  

EF Core is far more customizable than it may initially appear, but I encourage you to stick to the defaults whenever possible. It will make your life easier in the long run.  

Some ORMs require your entities to inherit from a specific base class or you to decorate your models with attributes to describe how to map them, EF Core heavily favors a **convention over configuration approach**.  


The connection string is a typical secret, so loading it from config makes sense. At runtime the correct configuration string for your current env will be used, so you can use different
databases when developing locally and in prod.  

## migraitons
Managing _schema_ changes for database, such as when you need to add column or new table, is notoriously difficult. Your app code is explicilty tied to a particular _version_ of a database, and you need to make sure the two are always in sync.  

Def: **Schema** refers to how the data is organized in a database, including, among other things, the tables, columns, and relationships between them.  

When you deploy an app, you can normally delete the old code and replace it with the new one - job done. If you need to roll back a change, delete that new code and deploy an old version of the app.  
The difficulty with the databases is that they **contain data**! That means that blowing it away and creating a new database with every deployment isn't possible.  
A common best practices is to explicitly version a database's schema along with your application's code. You can do it with the number of ways, but typically you need to store a diff between the previous schema of the db and the new schema, often as a SQL script.  

Before creating the first migration you will need to install the corresponding tooling. There are two primary ways to do it:
* package manager console - install EFCore.Tools using nuget
* .net tools - cross-platform tooling that you can run from the cmd and which extend the .NET SDK. You can istall it by running __dotnet tool install --global dotnet-ef__.

Using migrations is a great way to ensure your database is versioned along with your app code in source control.  

EF Core logs all the SQL statements it runs as LogLevel.Information events by default, so u can easily see what queries are being run against the database.  

Note: **Find** is actually a bit more complicated (Find() or FindAsync()). It first checks to see if the entity is already being tracked in EF Core's DbContext. If it is (because the entity was previously loaded in the request), the entity is returned immediately without calling the DB. This can obviously be faster if the entity is tracked, but it can also be slower if you know the entity isn't being tracked yet.  

Suggestion: Use soft delete except the cases where it is not possible, for instance user's personally identifying information.  

cascade soft delete: https://www.thereformedprogrammer.net/ef-core-in-depth-soft-deleting-data-with-global-query-filters/#:~:text=You%20can%20add%20a%20soft,restored%20and%20history%20is%20preserved.  

## using ef core in prod
read  ef core in action 2nd edition  
consider this before dive into prod:
* scaffolding of columns - ef core uses conservative values for things like string columns by allowing strings of large or unlimited length. In practice, u may want to restrict these and other data types to sensible values.
* validation
* handling concurrency - ef core provides a few ways to handle concurrency, where multiple users attempt to update an entity at the same time. One particular solution is to use Timestamp column on your entities.
* async

Ef core is a great tool but there are some aspects of working with a database that are unavoidably awkward. The issues of the db management is one of the thorniest issues to tackle:
* automatic migrations - if you automatically deploy your app to prod as part of some devops pipeline, u will inventibly need some way of applying migrations to a db automatically. You can tackle this in several ways, such as scripting the .NET tool, applying migrations in your app's startup code, or using a custom tool.
* multiple web hosts - multiple web servers hosting your app, all pointing to the same db. If so, then applying migrations in your app's startup code becomes harder, as you must ensure only one app can migrate the db at a time.
* making backward-compatible schema changes
* seeding data

