# app deployment
ASP.NET Core apps are, essentially, console applications.  
What makes them special is that it runs a web server, typically Kestrel, inside the console app process.  
Kestrel provides the http functionality; it passes any requests it receives to the body of your app to generate a response.  

The reality is that you will often want to place your ASP.NET Core apps behind a reverse proxy, such as IIS on Windows, or NGINIX or Apache on Linux.  
The reverse proxy is exposed directly to the internet, while the underlying web server (our app with Kestrel) is oxposed only to the proxy.  

If you are running your app using a Platform as a Servise (PaaS) such as, Azure App Service, you are using the reverse proxy there too, but its managed by Azure.  

benefits of using reverse-proxy:
* security - reverse proxies are specially designed to be exposed to malicious internet traffic
* performance - you can configure it to provide performance improvements by aggressively caching responses to requests
* process management - apps sometimes crash; some reverse-proxies can act as monitors/schedulers to ensure that if an app crashes, the proxy can restart it
* support for multiple apps

some downsides of using reverse-proxy:
* complexity - if you are managing the proxy yourself (instead of relying of a PaaS implementation) there can be a lot of proxy specific pitfalls to look out for
* inter-process communication - most reverse-proxies require two processes: a reverse-proxy and your app; communication between the two is slower than just exposing your app directly to the internet
* restricted features - not all reverse proxies support all the same features as an asp.net core app; for instance, Kestrel supports http/2, but if your reverse-proxy doesn't you wont get any benefits

# publish
To host and deploy your app on a server, you first need to publish it.  
You can use CLI command:
```sh
dotnet publish 
```
this **builds** and **packages** everything your app need to run.  
Please, use _Release_ configuration, instead of default _Debug_ configuration, so that the output will be fully optimized for running in prod:
```sh
dotnet publish --output publish --configuration Release
```
# RDD vs SCD
.net core apps can be deployed in two different ways: runtime-dependent deployments (RDD) nad self-contained deployments (SCD).  
Most of the time u'll use an RDD. This relies on the .Net 5.0 runtime being installed on the target machine that runs your published app.  
In contrast, an SCD contains all the code required to run your app, so the target machine doesn't need to have .Net 5.0 installed. Instead, publishing your app will package up the .Net 5.0 runtime with your app's code and dlls.

# docker
book - https://livebook.manning.com/book/docker-in-practice-second-edition/about-this-book/  
blog - https://www.stevejgordon.co.uk/docker-dotnet-developers-part-1  

nginx config - https://docs.microsoft.com/en-gb/aspnet/core/host-and-deploy/linux-nginx?view=aspnetcore-6.0  
## preparing your app for deplyoment to Linux
Generally speaking, **your app doesn't care which reverse proxy it sits behind**, whether it's IIS, Apache, or NGINIX - your app just receives requests and makes responses to them (without the reverse-proxy affecting things).  
When a request arrives at the reverse proxy, it contains some info that is lost after the request is forwarded  to your app.  
For example, the original request comes with the IP address of the client/browser connection to your app: once the request is forwarded from the reverse proxy, the IP address is that of the reverse proxy, not the user (browser).  
The standard solution to these issues is for the reverse proxy to add additional headers before forwarding requests to your app.  
For instance, the _X-Forwarded-For_ header identifies the original client's IP address, while the _X-Forwarded-Proto_ header identicates the original schema of the request (http or https).  
Solution for this are middlewares, like ForwardedHeadersMiddleware. more details page 552.  

Aside from headers other thigs to consider:
* line endings (LF on Linux and CRLF on Win) - Win and Linux use different character codes in text to indicate the end of a line.
* path directory separator ("\" on Windows, "/" on Linux)
* env variables can't contain ":"
* time zones and culture data may be missing
* directory structures are different

# configuring URLs
When using IIS as a reverse proxy, you dont have to worry. IIS integration with ASP.NET Core Module works by dynamically creating URLs that used to forward requests between IIS and your app.  
The hostname you configured in IIS is the URL that external users see for your app; the internal URL that IIS uses when forwarding requests is never exposed.  

With other reverse-proxy you may find you need to configure the URLs your app listens to directly.  

By default, ASP.NET Core will listen for requests on the URL http://localhost:5000.  
There are lots of ways to set this URL, for instance:
* using environment variables
* using command line arguments

http://mng.bz/go0v  
You choose the hosting environment by setting an environment variable on your machine called
ASPNETCORE_ENVIRONMENT . The .NET Core framework magically picks up this variable when your app starts and uses it to set the hosting environment.  
You can use a similar special environment variable to specify the URL that your app uses; its called ASPENTCORE_URLS.
```sh
set ASPNETCORE_URLS=http://localhost:8000
```
warning: add host filtering when using reverse-proxy - http://mng.bz/pVXK
