# authentication
* authentication - create users and let them log in to your app
* authorization - customizing the experience and controlling what user can do, based on the current logged-in user


* authenticaiton - the process of determining _who you are_
* authorization - the process of determining _what you're allowed to do_

def: you can think of the **principal** as the user of your app
In ASP.NET Core, principlas are implemented as ClaimsPrincipal, which has a collection of _claims_ associated with it.  
You can think about claims as properties of the current user. For example, you could have claims for things like email, name, or date of birth.

def: a **claim** is a single piece of information about a principal; it consists of a _claim type_ and an optional _value_.  

Claims can also be indirectly related to permissions and authorization,so you could have claim called HadAdminAccess or IsVipCustomer.

important: **Kestrel assigns a user principal to every request** that arrives at your app.  
Initially that principal is a **generic, anonymous, unauthorized principal with no claims**.

1. the client sends an identifier and a secret to the app, which identify the current user. For instance, you could send an email address (identifier) and a password (secret).
2. the app verifies that the identifier corresponds to a user known by the app and that the corresponding secret is correct.
3. if the identifier and secret are valid, the app can set the principal for the current request, but it also needs a way of storing these details for subsequent requests. For traditional web apps, this is typically achieved by storing an encrypted version of the user principal in a cookie.


important: **never store passwords in the database directly**. They should be hashed using a strong one-way algorithm. The ASP.NET Core Identity system does this for you, but it's always wise to reiterate this point!


after user has logged in:  
when a request containing the authentication cookie is received, Kestrel creates the default, unauthenticated, anonymous principal and assign it to the HttpContext.User principal. Any middleware that runs at this point, before AuthenticaitonMiddleware, will see the request as unauthenticated, even if there's a valid cookie.  
The authentication middleware calls the Authentication service, which decrypts and deserialize the user principal from the cookie and confirms it's valid.  
The HttpContext.User property is set to the deserialized principal and the request is now authenticated.  


Note: The AuthenticationMiddleware is **only** responsible for authenticating incoming requests and setting the ClaimPrincipal if the request contains an authentication cookie. It is **not responsible** for redirecting unauthenticated requests to the login page or rejecting unauthorized requests - that is handled by AuthorizationMiddleware.

## authentication for APIs and distributed systems

image page. 475  
In this situation, you have **multiple apps and APIs, all of which need to understand that the same user** is making a request accross all the apps and APIs. If you keep the approach the same as before, where each app manages its own users, things can quickly become unmanagable!  
(on top of that using cookies becomes problematic for some mobile clients in particular, or where you're making requests to multiple domains (as cookies only belong to a single domain)).  
How can you manage/improve it? The typical approach is **to extract the code that's common to all of the apps and APIs, and move it to an _identity provider_**.

pic page.476  

Instead of signing it to an app directly, the app redirects to an _identity provider_ app. The user signs in to this identity provider, which passes _bearer tokens_ back to the client that indicate who the user is and what they're allowed to access.  

One option for an identity provider is to delegate all the authentication responsibilites to a third-party identity provider (Facebook, IdentityServer4, etc). These manage users for you, so user information and passwords are stored in their database, rather than your own. The biggest advantage of this approach is that you don't have to worry about making sure your customer data is safe.  

TIP: Wherever possible, **I recommend this approach**, as it delegates security responsibilities to someone else. You can't lose your user's details if you never had them!  
Another common option is to build your own identity provider. This may sounds like a lot of work, but thanks to excellent libraries like OpenIddict (https://github.com/openiddict) and IdentityServer (https://docs.identityserver.io/), it's perfectly possible to write your own identity provider to serve bearer tokens that will be consumed by an application.  

In fact, you can almost think of an identity provider as a traditional web app that only has account management pages. It also has ability to generate tokens for other services, but it contains no other app-specific logic.
