# asp.net core identity
whether you write some simple razor pages or are setting up a new identity provider using a library like IdentityServer, y'll need a way of persisting details about your users, such as their usernames and passwords.  

its always better to use third-party like Auth0 or Azure Active Directory B2C.  
if you have strongly decided not, pitty of you, I recommend you consider using asp.net core identity system to store and manage user details.  

by default, asp.net core identity uses ef core to store user details in the db.  
which services are and aren't handled by asp.net core identity:
- managed by asp.net core identity
    * database schema for storing users and claims
    * creating a user in a database
    * password validation and rules
    * handling user account lockout (to prevent brute-force attacks)
    * managing and generating 2FA codes
    * generating password-reset tokens
    * saving additional claims to the db
    * managing third-party identity provides (facebook, google, twitter, etc)
- requires implementing by the developer
    * UI for logging in, creating, and managing users.
    * sending email messages
    * customizing claims for users (adding new claims)
    * configuring third-party identity providers

cosnider nuget **Microsoft.AspNetCore.Identity.UI** that gives whole of UI boilerplate for free.  
I strongly recommend using the default UI as a starting point, whether yo're creating an app or adding user management to an existing app. But when should you consider implementing all by yourself?
* I already have user authentication in my app - great, than you're probably right, Identity may not be necessary.
* I dont wanna use EF Core - luckily, the database integration in Identity is pluggable; so you can swap out the EF Core integration and use your own database integration libraries instead.
* my use case is too complex for identity - identity provides lower-level services for authentication, so you can compose the pieces however you like.
* I'm not using Bootstrap to style my app - the default Identity UI uses Bootstrap as a styling framework, the same as the default ASP.NET Core templates. Unfortunately, you can't easily change that,  but you can provide your own UI
* I don't want to build my own identity system - I'm glad to hear it. Using an external identity provider like Azure Active Directory B2C or Auth0 is a great way of shifting the responsibility and risk associated with storing users' personal info.